## Week 3

### <u>Day 15 (June 19th)</u>

Week 3, Day 1
 - Today was Juneteenth, so we had the day off. This helped me relax a bit more over the weekend, but I know there will be plenty to do tomorrow as well. I went for a typical morning swim -- though I went near 10:00 today so there was a lot more people (including some Masters Swimmers).  After a nice workout, I played some tennis with AF before grabbing a Ramen lunch with AF as well. Work wise, I spent most of the day working on Ranom Numbers (an 1800 rated CodeForces problem). This took me a few hours (the initial solution I came up with, that I was debugging for a quite a while, had a flaw in it and was incorrect). For dinner, SS, AF, DS, and I went to The Spot Mini, a nice Poke Bowl place nearby. I came back, did laundry, debugged my CodeForces problem some more, and finally got it. Despite having to look at the Editorial, this was a nice end to the extra rest day.

Tomorrow, my research group will discuss what our next steps are and what we want to share with our advisor in a meeting on Wednesday.

### <u>Day 16 (June 20th)</u>

Surprise Second Meeting Day

 - 8:30 - 9:00 AM: Morning swim to mark the "official" start of the third week of REU-CAAR. Good 20 minute-ish workout -- I still want to get out of bed a bit earlier to get this up to 25-30 minutes each day.

 - 10:00 AM - 12:00 PM: After finding out that our Wednesday meeting time we did last week was booked for this week, I had to set up a last-minute meeting change; my group decided that it would be best to meet tonight -- making today our all-important prep day. In the morning, we focused on summarizing our work from the last week and formalizing the ideas we had been thinking about. This was a really productive morning; we were actually able to fine-tune one of our "group fairness" (trying to make the output of a diffusion model more "fair" in terms of gender balance) more clearly, and define differentiable loss functions (which are necessary for gradient descent/weight updating in neural networks).

 - 12:00 - 1:30 PM: We listened to a talk on "Chess Playing Computers" (the history of AI in Chess and the advances over time) by Clyde Kruskal, who is an Associate Professor of CS at UMD. Crazily enough, I learned that he is the nephew of [Joseph Kruskal](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Joseph_Kruskal), who made the [Kruskal MST Algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kruskal%27s_algorithm). He discussed Monte Carlo Tree Search, Minimax, Alpha-Beta Pruning, and a number of other advances I had seen from my AI class at Swarthmore. I found it quite funny how energetic and quick-witted he was -- just like Bill, these older professors have a fun and unique energy to them, which I definitely want to have if I get old in academia. Another cool fact is that his father was apparently the first person to play against an AI in chess, which is absolutely crazy.

 - 1:30 - 4:00 PM: My research group continued gathering our thoughts and prepping for our meeting with our advisor. After forming a Meeting Abstract and aggregating our work/notes, SS had the idea to make a presentation. Though my group reluctantly agreed, this was actually a great idea as it's much easier to demonstrate our main idea through pictures rather than words. Also, given the remote (Zoom) format of our meetings, it definitely makes it easier for our advisor to follow along. We aggregated our thoughts and divided the slides into presentation points. I thought today was overall quite productive and it gave me good confidence heading into the meeting.

 I was super tired after research so I took a quick nap afterwards. For dinner, I grabbed some CFA -- there were so many people in STAMP today due to another session of New Student Orientation -- before heading back to my dorm to look over my slides.

 - 8:00 - 9:00 PM: Research Meeting Time! Just like last week, AF, SS, and I Zoomed in from the basement while XG Zoomed from home. This time, to avoid all working on the same computer, we put in our Airpods and decided to make it so only one of us would remain unmuted at a time. Though there was a bit of an echo (since we heard each other in person before our Airpods would pick it up on Zoom), this turned out to be a great arrangement. 

  > Content wise, I think the meeting went really well. The presentation format allowed us to explain our ideas much more clearly. At first, our advisor was asking many questions regarding our approach, but all of them were important points and helped us think about how to generalize our approach (our notion of "fair representation" is mainly gender-based, how will we extend this to other demographic groups/sensitive attributes?); I think these questions also helped us explain our idea more clearly to her. After each of our slides, she would ask us a few questions and we would clarify/expand on our solutions. There is a lot of details here, so I will leave them out and add them as we make progress on our project. I was particularly happy about the reception to our loss function definitions (we want to both minimize what we call "fairness loss" -- which attempts to mitigate the gender bias by getting the proportion of males generated to be as close to 0.5 as possible -- and "confidence loss" -- which forces images to be clearly male-defined or female-defined and not a "blob"/androgynous); she was excited that we had explained the mathematical reasoning behind our definitions. We actually just worked on this idea this morning, so it was great to see that come to fruition and be well-received. Overall, there are a bunch of avenues to explore code-wise (this will be difficult especially for me, but it's good to have more to learn and work on), but it seems like our next steps will be to set up an "Experiment Plan" (determining what dataset(s) to use, what models to run, what scripts we will need, etc.). Our advisor wants to check in with us about this before we run anything, which is really great as well as she'll be there to give us more guidance.

 Overall, today was great -- meeting wise, the feedback seemed positive and we were really happy about that. We also have more direction; rather than trying to formulate more ideas, we have a few that we are hopefully able to build on and test out more!

### <u>Day 17 (June 21st)</u>

Week 3, Day 3

 - 8:30 AM - 9:00 AM: Went for my typical morning swim today. When I woke up tired at around 8 AM and the weather report said that it was raining outside (which it was), I decided to simply enjoy an extra hour of sleep and go back to bed. After I saw that it would essentially rain for the next week, I quickly convinced myself that I would have to exercise/swim in the morning rain, otherwise it would be hard to get any exercise in this entire week. For the most part, swimming in the rain is not bad at all -- it's just the walk back that is a bit rough. I will bring my umbrella for tomorrow's workout.

 - 10:00 AM - 12:00 PM: In our morning research session, I typed up the notes I had scribbled down during our meeting with our advisor yesterday night, and we discussed the feedback we received as a group. XG was quick to point out potential complications with our main approach (training a linear head on an encoder after using a face detector/gender classifier with our own loss functions to train the head) -- namely that after the derivative can be noisy after back-propagating through a large amount of layers (I may be explaining this part wrong). We talked through potential solutions but concluded that one of our other ideas (Reinforcement Learning with rewards) may work better. Since we were having a positive group discussion (and my previous attempts to convince my group had failed), I decided against going to listen to Bill's Ramsey Theory talk -- an optional talk (but one that the REU was invited to) that was meant for some of the high school students he's working with. I was a bit bummed about that, as I later heard that the Comp Geometry group ended up attending.

 - 1:15 - 4:00 PM: The afternoon session continued with an extension of our previous discussion. I read over [RLPrompt: Optimizing Discrete Text Prompts with Reinforcement Learning](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2205.12548.pdf), a paper our advisor mentioned might be relevant to our Reinforcement Learning approach. In preparation for coding on the cluster, I also went through the process of pulling up a Jupyter Notebook on the UMD Cluster we will be working on. All this stuff is confusing and there is so much to learn, but it will be a good research process for our group to eventually split up code and work in parallel. Hopefully I won't fall behind, given that I haven't done any of this sort of coding before, but I hear it's not too hard to pick up. At the end, we started formulating the "Experiment Plan" i.e. formalizing what datasets/methods/models/visualization tools we plan to use. It turns out finding a good dataset with groups of people and their faces is more difficult than it sounds -- we will continue with this tomorrow.

 After research, ZS drove SS, SK, AB, and I to Target, where I picked up some snacks (now that I am writing this I realize I forgot to get fruit), including Yogurt and Granola Bars (which will be good post-morning-swim snacks) and some Bagel Bites for when the weekend food situation is dire. I had CFA for dinner with AB and SS, where AB and I debated the pros and cons for answers to "which superpower would you pick to have, and why?" (we both agreed on Teleportation but he had some strong opinions for why some of the other options I had considered weren't as good). For the rest of the day (I imagine the rest of the week will be similar due to the rain), I mainly stayed inside and worked on my own things.

 ### <u>Day 18 (June 22nd)</u>

Week 3, Day 4

 - 8:30 - 9:00 AM: Morning swim. Got there a bit late so went for a shorter workout, but still got in around 30ish laps, which is solid. It's going to be drizzling every one of these mornings, so I'll have to get used to that. I do feel like they heat up the pool more when it's raining because it felt really nice to get in the pool today. 

 - 10:00 AM - 12:00 PM: Today was the second week of my advisor's group meetings with her overall research group (including graduate students, other students, etc.). Since we are due to eventually present in one of these meetings (on July 6th), I've decided that it's good to listen in to the other research projects people are interested in to get a general sense of what we will talk about and what is being done. Our presentation is only supposed to be 5-10 minutes, so relatively informal, whereas these group meetings are around 2 hours, but I still think it is worthwhile to listen in. Today, a grad student discussed his Upcoming Projects, including Extreme Multi-label Compression/Online Data Pruning/GNNs for Tensor Completion. I will try to have these notes typed up and available in the `Notes` folder sometime within the next week. My group worked more on our research project -- getting a face detector and gender classifier to work in preparation for our overall project framework, and I joined in shortly after.

 - 1:15 - 4:00 PM: In the afternoon, we continued working on our overall framework. SS has been working on testing out a face detector and gender classifier using pretrained models found in literature (e.g. YOLOv8 for face), as we want to have a pipeline to at least begin testing out our different approaches. I am hoping to work with her more on the coding aspect as I feel like there is a lot for me to learn in that regard, and I think I will need to work more independently/more remotely outside of research hours to do so. During research, AF and I have been focusing on thinking about what datasets we want to use for our training set in our "linear head" approach. The issue is that existing face/general-purpose datasets like LAION-5B are extremely large (tens of TBs) and not feasible given the storage space we have access to. We will need to figure out how to get subsets of this larger dataset and ask our advisor for the feasibility of this approach. As a group, we also tried to formalize our overall framework some more. This is kind of vague, but the goal is to formulate a detailed Experiment Plan with potential issues, ideas, etc. before we end up running any experiments. I'm hoping we'll have a really solid one done tomorrow so we can share it with our advisor early next week. Also, a personal goal is to code more and familiarize myself with the models we are thinking of using/the general coding process for ML, which I think my group members are much more familiar with.

 - 4:00 - 5:00 PM: We had an optional talk hosted jointly with the Biology and Math REUs here at UMD this summer. Professor Najib M. El-Sayed presented his work on "Models in profiling host pathogen interactions." I thought the talk itself was good, as the speaker was quite engaged and interactive. Since the talk was more optional, the remainder of my REU group elected not to go and pretty much only half the overall REU-CAAR group showed.

 For dinner, I grabbed some QD before heading back to the dorms. I played some Catan with XG, SS, and DS, which took up quite a bit of time. The games itself were a bit unlucky for me so I didn't have as much fun as I could have (I think I also had a bad strategy in picking the starting board position). In the future, I will try to get myself to spend more time working on CodeForces, research, and exercising if it's not raining out, as those activities seem more productive overall. Last day of the work week coming up tomorrow! I'm going to try to sleep a bit earlier, swim a bit more, and have a solid last work day.

### <u>Day 19 (June 23rd) </u>

Week 3, Day 5

 - 8:30 - 9:00 AM: Morning swim. I'm getting consistent with the morning workout, no matter how I feel, so I'm pretty happy with that. I also got there a bit earlier than normal so I got to swim around 25 minutes today. There was a group before me that seemed like swimmers preparing for a meet, so there was a lot of moving and reshuffling of the lane lines (which I felt bad about -- since I was the only one in the pool, I kept asking where I should swim to make the lifeguards' jobs most convenient). Oh well.

 - 10:00 - 12:00 PM: We continued with our work from the previous days. SS got the face detector & gender classification model to run, but after testing the gender classification model on the segmented faces, we noticed that the classification results were not that great (for example, for photos with three male and three female doctors, the classifier erroneously predicted -- and with high confidence -- that one of the male doctors was female and that all three female doctors were male). In light of that, I spent the morning trying to run YOLOv8's object detector (to recognize the box frame of a person) and then pass that through the gender classifier model to see if the results would differ. We also made a team GitHub page which is really great as it will allow easier workflow and collaboration for projects with similar code (like the person vs. face detector approach).

 - 1:15 - 4:00 PM: After continuing with my morning experiments, I didn't find much improvement in the images I tested. We found that the "person" detector is not that accurate (as for images with people bunched together, the YOLOv8 detector draws a box around parts of multiple people and labels them as one person). The gender classification model wasn't all that great either, as it still gave me errors. We will need to ask our advisor if there is any powerful, open-source gender classifier we can use for this step or if we need to make and train one ourselves (this shouldn't be too bad but will take work). Potential goals for this weekend is to streamline the testing/image copying process more (currently, there is no way to view images when ssh'ing into the cluster we use, so we need to manually add and move them to our local computers every time we want to view the results of the face detector). A possible approach is to make a pipeline that allows for more effective code running and testing. 

 I am feeling a bit more tired than normal after research, so maybe I'll have to sleep earlier. After research, DS, AB, and I attempted to organize a group to head out for dinner at the College Park Grill, but we were unsuccessful in convinicing others. Regardless, we went out for dinner, which was relatively fun and quite social. I learned a bunch more about them, their research experiences, and about their opinions about the REU. After coming back, I solved a more-annoying-than-difficult CodeForces problem that turned out to be 1700 rated. I definitely want to keep coding, but will need to spend more time on research as well outside of the normal working hours. Onto the weekend!

 ### <u>Day 20 (June 24th) </u>

 - 10:00 AM - 1:00 PM: I spent the morning working on a [CodeForces Contest](https://codeforces.com/contest/1842) -- I ended up participating with my alternate account. In the future, I think I want to avoid this as I need to get over the fact that rating doesn't matter all that much. I managed to get the first two (the first one took a bit longer than I would have liked) but got stumped on the third one. After the contest, I worked and talked through the problem with AB. We found the O(n^2) solution and I promptly coded it up -- not thinking about the complexity -- until I got TLE on test case 3. After some failed attempts to fix the complexity, I stumbled on a better solution posted by a user in Discord, took a while to understand it with AB again, and coded that up. All in all, it was fun to go through the contest and to discuss with AB. I will definitely need more practice to hit my goal of Expert by the end of the year.

 - 1:00 PM - 3 PM After the contest, I grabbed some Panda from STAMP (they, along with CFA, are the only ones open in the Union on Saturdays) and then promptly "rewarded myself" (I told myself I deserved it since we are more or less solidifed with our research project idea now) by buying $200 Beats headphones with my Terrapin Express Card. The meal plan covers $1400 over the summer, giving us roughly $140 to spend per week on food. After three weeks, I'm now at around $900 due to this purchase, which puts me slightly ahead of pace. I've been spending around $10 per meal so I think the purchase is justifiable -- also, I wanted to have a pair of headphones. Definitely have to put this to good use though. :)

 - 3:30 - 5:00 PM: Went for a longish swim at the pool. I ended up going for 50+ laps, which took around 40 minutes. The weather report said it was going to thunderstorm all afternoon, but it did not. Since it was quite hot out, the workout was a lot of fun, and it was great to get some good exercise in even over the weekend. My guess is I'll take the day off tomorrow from swimming.

 In the evening, I ate some leftover CFA Veggie Wrap I was able to get for free from research on Friday. I'm hoping to get a bit of work done for research as well, like running some more test experiments or setting up a basic "test set" of groups of people for our models to test. 