## Week 2

### <u>Day 8 (June 12th)</u>

Literature Review (pt. 5) & Further Discussion
- 10:00 AM - 12:00 PM: We started off the day by discussing our project ideas further and continuing to read papers. My main goal today (which will continue into tomorrow) has been and will be to type up the notes I've taken and to read the most relevant papers more closely. I'm quite happy with the progress I made on this front (the notes I have after today reach almost 8 pages). For email privacy concerns, I will avoid sharing the Overleaf document but will keep a running copy of the work we've done in the `Notes` section of this repo.
- 12:00 PM - 1:30 PM: This is typically our lunch break period, but today we had a group lunch hosted by the REU (Q-Doba) and listened to a talk by one of the mentors Laxman Dhulipala on his group's project "Parallel Algorithms for High Dimensional Clustering." I quite enjoyed the talk -- it was really fun to connect concepts I've learned in my Algorithms and Compilers classes and from my competitive programming experience.
- 1:30 PM - 4:00 PM: We wrapped up the day by doing much of the same work I did in the morning (again, will need to continue to do this tomorrow). We're hoping to finalize our talking points with Furong for tomorrow in preparation for an early Wednesday morning meeting. Papers I took notes on today include the Generative Adversarial Networks, Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Model / Denoising Diffusion Implicit Model, Debiasing Methods Survey, and the Fair Diffusion paper. Tomorrow, I'll continue with the Adversarial Classifier, Debiasing Vision-Language Models via Biased Prompts, CLIP, and finish up the Debiasing Methods Survey papers for note-taking.

After research, I ended up checking out the Union's Campus Store (I'll definitely get something before the program ends) before eating at CFA with PM, MA, NL, DS, and ZS. I did some Codeforces before playing some board games with SS, AZ, AB, ML, and DS to round out the night. I went swimming this morning before research, and I felt that it was nice to wake up earlier and get some exercise in. In the future, I'll continue to do this as I can.

### <u>Day 9 (June 13th)</u>

Literature Review (pt. 6) & Meeting Prep

- 10:00 AM - 12:00 PM: After another morning swim (note: I'm happy I'm getting exercise in before research) and a quick breakfast from the IRB cafe (the second in as many days), the research day continued on like it has the last few days: more paper reading and LaTeXing my notes on the attached Notes document. At 11:00 PM, I Zoomed into to a PhD defense on "On Algorithms, Fairness, and Incentives" as it seemed relevant to some of the work we're doing in the REU and because I wanted to see what a PhD defense session is like (a few years down the line, I might be in the same position). While I wasn't able to follow as closely, I still think it was a worthwhile experience. 
- 1:15 - 4:00 PM: Since SS was working remotely today, we decided to spend the morning session a bit more focused on individual reading/note-taking. In the afternoon session, we were more focused on prepping our talking points for a meeting with our advisor tomorrow. At around 3:00 PM, we zoomed in with SS to discuss as a group before jotting down our main points for tomorrow. Hopefully the meeting goes well -- it would be sad to hear that the ideas we've been reading and thinking about for the last week and a half are not fruitful and/or attainable. That being said, I am sure the meeting will give us new direction into our project, which is an exciting avenue given that we've mostly been reading papers thus far.

After research today, I rode in XG's car as he went to get some gas, before driving to STAMP (Student Union) for some early dinner. Our research group had decided yesterday that we wanted to watch the new Spiderman Movie (Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse) and so we went to the theatre at 6 today to do so. After managing to convince another car owner at the REU and a few other REU participants, a large group of us (XG, AF, SS, me, PM, MA, JS, SK, DS, and NL) convened at the theatre and had a great time watching the movie. There was a bit of a debacle with the seats -- it turns out that when my research group ordered the tickets yesterday, we had actually ordered for 6 PM that day. When movie watchers came in and said we were in their seats, we were in a bit of a pickle. After a bit of shuffling at the start of the movie (and some manager assistance), we were relegated to the back of the theatre, which was a perfectly fine seating arrangement as we at least got to watch the movie. We came back and a subset of us played some Codenames. Definitely a fun experience and a crazy day.

### <u>Day 10 (June 14th)</u>

Meeting Day

-9:00 - 10:00 AM: Our first official group meeting with our advisor! Since our advisor is in China this summer, she will only be able to Zoom in either early in the morning or late at night. So far, the plan is to meet just once a week for an hour, so we will need to make really good use of this meeting time. We met on the first day a bit more informally -- to talk expectations and discuss projects -- but today was different. Our advisor FH was joined by two grad students. As a group, we had prepared a meeting abstract and points to talk about (as well as my Overleaf Note document which I unfortunately don't think anyone else took the time to look over), and so we began by discussing project ideas and the approaches we read in our lit review.

> Our topic relates to Fairness in Vision-Language Models. Specifically, we want to look into “contextualized bias” in text prompts for diffusion models. For example, "give me a photo of a doctor" may have the *implicit gender bias* (that relates doctors to males), whereas "give me a photo of a hospital" has a contextualized bias in the sense that hospitals have doctors, who will likely be generated as predominately male.  We discussed three types of approaches (pre-processing, in-processing, and post-processing) and their feasability. A pre-processing approach may be to augment the dataset. During training of a diffusion model, there may be a gender imbalance in the images of the dataset (more males than females for a given occupation). We would like to see if we can make the dataset more balanced to support a more fair model -- we may be able to work on this with the help of domain translators (potentially even a diffusion model). The in-processing approach we discussed involves focusing on fine-tuning one or two layers in a VLM. This type of approach was the least clear among the three for me, and may be difficult to actually implement. Finally, for post-processing approaches, we talked about potentially fine-tuning the text encoder for CLIP (since there is bias on the "text side" of these VLMs). We also discussed potential embedding searches to solve the issue of contextualized bias. 

Forgive me if these notes are unclear -- as always, this is simply my understanding of what we discussed and may be wrong. All in all, the meeting went fine. Our advisor stressed the importance of nailing down a topic that has both a reasonable approach and that is novel/meaningful. She mentioned that we are still okay pace-wise (given that we have narrowed our topic area down), but that we should continue to think of **novel approaches** rather than simply extending previous work. This will be a tough task but I'm sure my group will manage. Furthermore, our advisor is more hands-off than my previous research advisors. This is not a bad thing, but my group and I will need to be independent and to take advantage of our available resources; a goal of ours will be to more consistently reach out and discuss ideas/brainstorm as I've been doing on this blog. We made the plan to try and update our advisor and the graduate students twice a week; adding a grad student as another project mentor is also a big goal of ours as it may help give us more direction. We'll definitely see how these ideas pan out, but I'm still hopeful that our research this summer (especially the next few days, where we will need to continue to discuss ideas/read papers) will be fruitful.

10:00 AM - 12:00 PM, 1:30 PM - 4:00 PM: I'm combining these sections as the main focus of the day was the meeting. After the meeting, we discussed next steps together as a group. We are hoping to make our goals actionable and concrete to prepare ourselves for the coming stretch. 

Throughout the afternoon, we copied over our meeting notes (which we typed during the meeting) into a more legible/readable format, and to better sort the ideas we discussed with our advisor. Tomorrow, I think we will take more actionable steps and explore and discuss different approaches, analyzing their novelty and their feasability. From what it sounds like, we are still on pace with our advisor's expectations (we narrowed down our subect area relatively well, but now we want to be specific about the work we want to do and to make it clear why it's important/novel), which is always a good sign. We'll definitely keep at it.

After research today, a large group of the REU program went to play tennis (PM, MA, XG, NL, SK, SS, DS, and I). We were only able to borrow five rackets, but we rotated. Some of them were beginners and so we taught them the basic techniques and everyone seemed to pick it up quickly/enjoy it. For dinner, we ended up noticing that a dining hall near the gym was crowded with people. Since there is a National History Day (NHD) competition of sorts happening until Friday, the dining halls are open more. A quick show of our ID card got us into the big dining hall for free (I think the workers may have mistaken us with NHD students), so I certainly can't complain about that. It was good getting out with a big group of people and exercising by playing tennis (I missed my morning swim due to the early meeting with my advisor), and especially taking a well-deserved break after research today. All in all, a long and tiring day, but one that I'll hopefully look back on in a week or two and remember fondly.

### <u>Day 11 (June 15th)</u>

Project Brainstorm, Extended (Day 1)

- 8:30 AM - 9:00 AM: Morning Swim. This is an activity I want to stay consistent with as I feel like to force myself to sleep earlier, to wake up earlier in the morning, and to get some exercise in before research. Physical health is important!

- 10:00 AM - 12:00 PM: Our goal today (this will probably be our goal for the next few days as well) was to continue to work on fine-tuning our project ideas and finding a novel approach to fairness in diffusion models. My advisor's research group (consisting of grad students, interns, and the REU students this summer) host Thursday morning (10 - 12) group meetings to discuss research progress being made, and my group decided to join to listen in. In the future, I think this will be valuable to hear about what everyone is working on and to learn from others' research progress; it turns out we are also scheduled to present sometime later in the summer. Today, a grad student talked about "Bilevel Optimization Problems in Machine Learning and Efficient Solvers" -- I will try to keep notes on each of the meetings as a TeX file in the notes folder.

- 1:30 PM - 4:00 PM: It's great to read the work done and to think about ideas, and I prefer to note-take during the process (which helps me understand the papers better), but at a certain point, paper reading will only got you so far. As a group, we thought it might be a good idea to set up our code environments to prepare to implement/test some of the approaches we've been reading about. I haven't done any previous work with PyTorch or Virtual Environments, so AF helped me set both of these up. SS and I then worked together on a [https://pytorch.org/tutorials/beginner/basics/quickstart_tutorial.html](PyTorch Tutorial) to close out the day. To address one of our other goals (which is more consistent updates/outlining our group's goals each day), SS had the idea of creating a Trello Board to organize work flow. This is my first time using Trello but I think it will be good to outline what we are working on each day and update our mentors with progress using the Trello Board.

- 4:00 - 5:00 PM: My REU group (REU-CAAR) joined up with students from the other REU Programs (I believe REU-MATH and REU-BRIDGE) at UMD this summer to hear from Erin Molloy on a Computational Biology talk: "Models and methods for reconstructing population-level evolutionary histories and relationships to tumor phylogenetics." 

After research, I ended up checking out the campus bookstore in the Student Union (my third time going and not buying anything) and then grabbed dinner from QD. I then ended up coming back to do some Codeforces before heading out to play some soccer/football with DS, PM, MA, and NL. On another note, I learned today that we don't have free access to the dining hall -- we'll have to pay the $14 for lunch or $18 for dinner, which in my opinion is a complete rip-off. I think I'll stick to STAMP for lunch and dinner (each of the meals are around 10-12 dollars, which is well under the allocated "$14 per lunch and dinner if no breakfast" meal plan that we were given at the start of the program). In terms of physical activity, I think I'm doing good with exercising (including swimming in the morning) and socializing with others. I'm hoping that the research progress will follow soon once we solidify our approach!

### <u>Day 12 (June 16th)</u>

Project Brainstorm, Extended (Day 2)

- 8:30 - 9:00 AM: Got in a good morning swim again. I went for around 25 minutes and got in a good workout.

- 10:00 AM - 12:00 PM: After trying to set up our accounts for cluster access and applying yesterday, we checked earlier today to see if our accounts had been approved. My login details weren't working and neither were my group's, so we sent a few messages back and forth with our PI and the UMIACS Help Desk to get everything sorted out. We now have cluster access (I don't think I'll be using it until after we've solidified our project ideas, but the rest of the group seemed really excited). I read a few new papers, including [https://arxiv.org/pdf/2110.02711.pdf](DiffusionCLIP: Text-Guided Diffusion Models for Robust Image Manipulation) and [YOLO5Face](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2105.12931.pdf), a face detection model that we may end up using. 

- 1:30 - 4:00 PM: I spent most of the afternoon finishing up the papers I had started reading in the morning and briefly starting setting up a Virtual Environment, PyTorch, etc. on my cluster account. When I'm not sure what progress I can make, I tend to default to reading papers and trying to glean the relevant ideas/processes, and so I've been doing a lot of that lately. Progress is definitely going to be incremental, but we'll keep at it.

After research, I went to a nearby barber shop to get a haircut, and then headed back to the dorms before heading back out to play tennis with AB. The weather report said there might've been a thunderstorm, but just like in the morning (when it said it was going to thunder around the time I was going to swim), it was completely off. I then went to a nearby Poke place with ZS and SS for dinner, since the Student Union unfortunately closes early on Fridays. My group also had a 9:30 PM meeting with Bill Gasarch to talk about our project and how everything is going. I feel like this was helpful, but it was also just great to talk to Bill given how enthusiastic and energetic he is. I'd say he's definitely a big reason why REU-CAAR seems to be successful.

