## Week 10

### <u>Day 64 (August 7th) </u>

Week 10 Day 1: The Final Week

- 8:30 - 9:00 AM: As is tradition at the start of each week: Week 10 here we go! It's crazy to think it really is going to be the end of the REU in just a few days. I'm definitely going to try to make the most of the time we have together and also hopefully finish strong research-wise as well. To kick off this final week, I decided to go for a classic 2 mile morning run. Legs definitely felt quite tired with all the running/sprinting I did yesterday, but it was good to get a nice workout in. Since my group and I asked LH to be our "friend" (Bill wants all practice presentations to have a "friend" who has not seen our presentation to act as an unbiased, secondary feedback-giver along with Clyde Kruskal), she also asked me this morning to sit into her presentation. This meant that I had to shower quickly and head out earlier than normal to make sure I made it by 9:45.

- 9:45 AM - 12:00 PM: I made it over to the CSI building at 9:45, running in to LH along the way. There, I listened to LH, GP, and AZ's project presentation (Machine Translation for Wikipedia), which was quite good. Though this was their group's second round of feedback, Clyde gave pretty solid feedback on each of their slides -- so much so that he went 25 minutes over, leading to a slight delay for each of the next few groups. The MT group's talk went until around 11 AM, after which I promptly headed over to talk with my group about our project. I finished up one of the slides I was working on last night, and worked slightly past our typical lunch time. I totally forgot that Bill was hosting a lunch talk but that didn't seem to be a problem...

- 12:00 - 1:30 PM: Bill was scheduled to give his lunch talk "Trick Questions or Stupid Questions" starting at 12, but since the presentation groups got a bit delayed, we didn't start until 12:30. The talk itself was solid, as all Bill talks have been, and mainly consisted of him asking us math-ish riddles, giving us the answer, and then asking if the question was a trick or just stupid.

- 1:30 - 3:00 PM: After the talk, I went up to our conference room to get in some more work and finish up the presentation. Our big order of business this week is to deliver our final presentation Wednesday morning, so I've been doing what I can to make the presentation orderly and understandable. In the afternoon, this mainly consisted of adding animations to relevant slides, reorganizing details, and then doing a practice runthrough right before we were scheduled to present. The practice runthrough itself went to about 22 minutes, which is not great considering our presentation is supposed to be between 15 and 20. This was the first time we practiced as an entire group -- it has been kind of hard to get everyone together and actually go through with the presentation (and I get the sense the others care a bit less about it than I do); in the middle of our practice presentation, we also received an email from Bill that due to the schoolwide tornado warning, we were to head "home" and that our presentation (which was meant for the 3 - 4 PM time slot) would be rescheduled. This was definitely a blow to my group -- all other groups have already done two rounds of presentations with Clyde whereas we haven't even gotten a single one (due to AF being out last week and the tornado warning today). While I understand that Bill probably picked the 3-4 PM time slot for us since if we went over, we wouldn't delay the other groups' presentations, and that today's tornado warning couldn't have been forecasted, it just sucks that we haven't gotten any outside feedback yet/done any official runthroughs. (We are now scheduled for a Zoom one tomorrow at 11 AM, the day before our presentation, which is better than nothing at this point).

Per the tornado warning, most of the REU group congregated in my suite. We ended up talking for a bit and playing some Jackbox (online group game). For dinner, since the Student Union was closed, I made some Ramen and Soba (courtesy of a big package order from my parents) and then rejoined the group to watch some Kung Fu Panda. The night activity they were planning involved alcohol at the very least so I decided to hold off on that, and retire to my room to organize the presentation and work on some CodeForces. Looking forward to tomorrow -- hopefully we get some solid (I imagine it will be quite useful for us as well) advice on our presentation and that we clutch up for the big one on Wednesday! There are also rumblings of a plan to go to the beach post-research and that will be nice if it ends up happening...

### <u>Day 65 (August 8th) </u>

Week 10 Day 2: Prep Day

- 8:30 AM - 9:00 AM: I ended up sleeping a bit later than I'd have liked yesterday -- I ended up joining some of the other REU students upstairs and talking before working a bit on the presentation and calling it a night. As such, I decided to get some extra sleep in today in the morning.

- 10:00 AM - 12:30 PM: In the morning, I did some final runthroughs of the presentation -- fixing up some of my parts -- before joining up with AF, SS, and XG for our practice presentation with Clyde Kruskal. The meeting itself went fine -- we got a lot of useful feedback on our beginning slides, and Clyde seemed to be fine with a number of our later slides (I thought that was kind of surprising considering the feedback he gave to other groups, but I suppose this is a good thing). The meeting ended up going over time and we got kicked out by a different group who had reserved the conference room for 12:30.

- 1:30 - 4:00 PM: After lunch, a large group of us went to the Campus Bookstore to spend our remaining meal money on campus merchandise. PM spent around $650 on clothes (including some for others in the REU -- a large portion of us purchased the same "Smiley" Maryland shirt and we all plan to wear it tomorrow to the presentation), and I got myself the smiley shirt. Instead of heading back to IRB afterwards, I helped PM move his new purchases to his room, and afterwards, I fixed up some of the slides per Clyde's suggestions. Our group convened in the basement for a final practice presentation to round out the day.

Post-research, XG, LH, SS, AF, and I drove to the beach, where we met up with ZS, SK, DS, and MA. I mainly threw around the football with DS (even joining a game with some other non-REU beach people) while the remainder of the group played near the water (there were a bunch of baby jellyfish so we didn't do anything crazy in there) and played around with the sand. We got quite a few pictures to commemorate the occasion -- MA is leaving tomorrow after the presentation so we made sure to enjoy our "final moments of the REU" with him. Afterwards, we ended up going for dinner at a local burger place and arrived back at home at 10:45 PM... I brushed up, showered, did some CodeForces, and made some final touches to the presentation, while getting in a bit more practice. It's crazy to think the culmination of our 10 weeks of work will be all presented tomorrow -- fingers crossed everything goes fine! Let's finish strong. :)

### <u>Day 66 (August 9th) </u>

Week 10 Day 3: Final Presentations and Round 1 of Goodbyes

 - 8:30 - 9:00 AM: Today was the day of our final presentations! Since the presentations were due to start at 9:30, I wanted to wake up, shower, and then run through the presentation a bit more before heading over to IRB. 
 
 - 9:30 AM - 12:30 PM: The presentations started at 9:30, with the presentation order as: Parallel Algorithms, Fair Decision Making (us), Machine Translation, Computational Geometry, Markov Chains for Climate Change, then Quantum Computations. Though we were scheduled to present second, XG somehow misset his alarm and thus we ended up geting moved two slots back. Besides this being a minor incovenience (and us momentarily figuring out how/whether we should cover for his slides), it didn't mean much in the long run, and our presentation went relatively smoothly. We got a number of questions afterwards about our approaches/general comments from Bill, which is good since it seems like people were following along well. I was a bit bummed that our advisor, who had asked when the final presentations were, didn't end up making it to watch (she initially said she was running late, then asked about remote participation when we told her the presentation got delayed, but there was no such option) but that's okay -- the presentation is more for us to conclude and summarize our work in the program. The rest of the talks were quite good; I ended up taking a few pictures for my friends during their presentations to send to them afterwards. After the presentations, we convened outside to take some group pictures, including quite a few of them with just people with the Smiley Maryland hoodie (my group, the Comp Geo group, the Parallel group, and a few others agreed to wear it during the presentation) and a few individual pictures with Bill.

 - 1:00 - 4:00 PM: In place of research after lunch, we mainly hung around with MA and PM, since they were scheduled to leave today. The goodbyes were difficult, especially since MA and PM were instrumental in making the REU more fun for everyone. MA left around 2:30, and we again took a bunch of pictures before bidding him goodbye. PM left a bit later -- we hung around in his apartment, helped him move all of his stuff to the car (there was a lot, including at least six pairs of shoes, a TV, and more...), before taking some time to say goodbyes once more. There will definitely be more farewells in the coming days but I hope we all keep in contact and go on to do great things!

 Post research, we mainly sat around and talked with each other before heading to CFA for dinner. We worked on a math riddle AF gave us (say you have an island with knights and spades -- knights who always tell the truth and spades who can lie. Given there are n spades and knights, and there are more knights than spades, construct a O(n) algorithm to find a knight) for a while afterwards before retracing our steps in the morning to find DS's lost longboard. I did a quick one mile run in khakis and a polo on the way back, before showering and relaxing for the night. 

 There are just a few more official days left of the REU -- it's certainly been a memorable experience that I've been really glad to have. Tomorrow, we are watching the Computational Biology REU's talks (they watched ours today), which should be fun.

 ### <u>Day 67 (August 10th) </u>

Week 10 Day 4: REU-BRIDGE Participants

 - 9:30 AM - 12:30 PM: The REU-BRIDGE presentations (for biology) started at 9:30 -- I got there a few minutes late and ended up taking a back seat near Bill. We watched 5 of the presentations, took a quick break (I snagged some coffee -- which tasted terrible -- and some Dunkin Donuts from the snack station along the way), before listening to the last 5. There was one presentation that I thought was hilarious -- it was called SmartUnderwear, which is just a device for measuring flatulence (essentially farts). Most of the talks were pretty solid; I understood them to a varying degree, with me understanding more of the first few presentations in each block of 5.

 - 1:00 - 4:00 PM: After lunch, we walked around in the bookstore again to spend our remaining meal money (I got a Maryland sweater for Sherry, outerwear for me, and a Hydroflask to replace my broken water bottle -- leaving me with just 10 bucks). I then went back to do some laundry and relax, before hanging out with the other REU kids. 

 We played some group games like charades (which I thought was quite fun), talked a bit more as a group, and decided to head to Wawa for dinner. CL, MT (both of which are high school students), DS, and I took one car while ZS, XG, AF, and LH took the other. We returned back to the dorms to eat our food (I thought the Wawa food wasn't too good but that may just be because I haven't really had an apetitite lately) before hanging out and talking for the night. Tomorrow is our official "Farewell Talk" and "Farewell Dinner", and a lot of students will be leaving tomorrow, so I'll be sure to wish everyone a goodbye before I head out on Saturday.


 ### <u>Day 68 (August 11th) </u>

Week 10 Day 5: Farewell Presentation and Discussion(s)

- 9:00 - 10:00 AM: Today was the official last day of the REU. I ended up staying up quite late talking to SS, LH, XG, DS, and AF yesterday night -- especially since it was SS's last full day at the REU (the remainder of us were planning on leaving Saturday or later). To commemorate a fun ten weeks, we planned to head over to Vigilante Coffee to grab some coffee and acai bowls (as we did on the first day). However, our plans changed (mostly due to lack of sleep by SS) and instead we decided to head to the Starbucks in STAMP. We grabbed some farewell pictures with SS and then walked over to IRB. On the way there, we ran into SK who said her goodbyes to SS. At a random intersection, SS decided to head back (she had walked with us to accompany us but was scheduled to leave without hearing the farewell talk) and so we did some group hugs and said goodbye.

- 10:00 AM - 12:00 PM: To cap off the REU, Bill gave a "farewell talk," which was similar in style to the intro talk that we had on the first day. It was nice to reflect on the program's successes, and he also responded to feedback that we had sent him previously on how to improve the program. We each went around and talked about our favorite parts of the program and then afterwards got some Olive Garden catering. While a bunch of students (including CK, JS, NL, AZ, ZS, AB, ML, and maybe more) left to get packing, a few of us stayed behind to talk more with Bill and asked him some questions. We also worked on a few math puzzles that he gave us (one problem was to show that you cannot 3-color the positive integers less than 2000 such that numbers that differ by a perfect square have different colors. Note: we found a much smaller bound than 2000 in 59, and the smallest such bound is apparently 29). It was a nice way to wrap up this farewell gathering by working on some group problems with CL, DS, AF, SK, and to some extent, MT and LH.

Afterwards, we all headed back to the dorms to relax while people who were leaving packed some more. We bid our farewells to CK and AZ at 2ish, and later, ML and AB at 3ish. I made sure to get as many photos together as I could to commemorate the occasion -- after all, it's been a nice 10 weeks with everyone. We went back to our suite before throwing around a football (mainly me, DS, and XG) with CL, as LH, SK, and AF relaxed in the grass. We snapped some group pictures once again before saying goodbye to CL and walking him to his car. The remainder of us stopped at the nearby rolled ice cream spot afterwards to grab some ice cream and chill while playing Contact. Afterwards, we retired to our rooms to pack up some more and made some dinner plans, as we wanted to enjoy our last dinner together. Since AF's parents were coming later and planned to have dinner with her, SK, LH, XG, DS, and I decided to head to dinner at the College Park Grill with DS's mom, who was also around to travel back with him. It was nice to meet her, and we had a nice chat about some of the program's best moments and our projects. After walking back to our suite, we decided to watch some funny YouTube videos together and play some group Charades once more before each retiring for the night. I ended up spending a bit more time packing up before getting some much needed sleep.

 ### <u>Day 69 (August 12th) </u>

Week 10 Day 6: Final Farewells

Today was the day of farewells, with SK, AF, DS, and I scheduled to leave today. After a night of more than 6 hours of sleep (I got 7 today), I woke up to my 8:15 alarm -- SK was due to leave at 8:30, so I woke up DS and joined LH and AF to say goodbye to her. We got a few pictures (courtesy of Bill Gasarch) and watched as they drove away to drop SK at the airport. 

To enjoy each other's company a bit more, we decided to head towards Dunkin' Donuts as a group to get some coffee and some breakfast, as we reminisced on the program and how sad it was to say our goodbyes. When we got back to the dorms, we (XG also joined us around this time) ran into AF's parents, and we exchanged some pleasantries before heading back up to individually pack our suitcases. AF left around 11, and we did the typical picture taking and group hugs. We had planned to get a nice photo with LH where I was to put my hands on their heads (since they always say I act like their "mother" or older sibling), and we forgot to do that, until LH and I decided to walk over to AF's car as she was leaving and stop their parents to grab one last photo (I'm definitely happy we got it).

After AF left, I helped DS to clean our suite before packing some more of my individual stuff. After a good 30 min - 1 hr, DS's mom came by, and she helped lead the charge in cleaning up more and clearing out the fridge. After quite a few trips to the trash/recycle dumpsters and to the donation site in the basement, we helped DS move his stuff out the dorm and once again said our goodbyes. Out of the suite, I was definitely closest to DS and it was quite sad to see him go.

Since most of my stuff was packed, I went up to the suite and packed my final things, before heading out for a walk to return my keys and to chat with LH, one of the students I was closest to in the REU. We had a nice chat to round out the REU -- I told her I was especially grateful for the fact that she helped me reflect on my future goal/purpose in academia; I may not ever be (or even need to strive to be) the best or most accomplished researcher, but if I can help my students and more importantly the people around me in any way, whether that's teaching them new concepts or just helping them be happy, then I will have made a lasting impact on them. (I feel like what I just wrote isn't the best description of my thoughts so feel free to reach out if you want me to expand on these feelings). After the walk, LH and XG helped me move my belongings out of the dorm, I waited for an extremely expensive Uber (hopefully reimbursement covers this), and I bid my farewells to them and the REU as a whole. 

I am so grateful for the experience itself, and especially owe everything to my fellow REU participants, who made the program so much more rewarding and enjoyable. In no particular order, thank you to DS, SS, LH, AF, SK, XG, PM, MA, CL, AB, ML, ZS, AZ, NL, CK, JS, GP, MT, as well as Bill and Auguste for this incredible summer experience.