## Week 9

### <u>Day 57 (July 31st) </u>

Week 9 Day 1: 1.5 to Go

- 8:30 - 9:00 AM: Week 9, here we go. Though there are technically two weeks left in the program, it's really closer to 1.5 considering we have our final presentation next Wednesday. This means go time in terms of finalizing our research process/presentations (we have a practice presentation on August 7th and a final meeting sometime August 3rd with our advisor as well). With my stomach problems, I've been avoiding any heavy exercise -- so no swimming or running for a while -- but today I wanted to go out and get some exercise with an "easy run." This ended up working out fine, since I got an extra thirty minutes of sleep that I would have used on the walking commute to and from the gym if I had gone to the pool instead. I made it back in time for a shower at my typical time before heading out for research in the morning.

- 10:00 - 10:40 AM: Today's research schedule was a bit weird. AF, XG, SS, and I congregated in our normal room, discussed general approaches (and XG gave me some valuable advice about how to fix the CUDA out of memory errors I've been getting -- instead of requesting extra memory, request a "better" GPU), what we should have done before the next meeting with our advisor, and presentation plans. This was a productive discussion, but it was cut short because we were to head to REU talks by students from Salisbury in the nearby AV Williams Building. 

- 11:00 AM - 12:30 PM: The Salisbury REU program students gave talks on Homologies, Using Machine Learning to Study Tumors, ML for Oyster Classification, Parallel Matching (similar to Gale-Shapley), Social Network Study, and Deep Learning for Satellite Imagery. They were all pretty good, especially for work done over a short summer program. I thought it was pretty funny that the Oyster Project also used YOLOv8, an object detector that we used for face detection in our project. 

After the talks, a full room of nearly 100 students, faculty, and parents were anxious for lunch... with the catering yet to arrive. 

- 12:30 - 2:30 PM: Instead of taking a break for lunch, we jumped into the next round of activities, which included Grad Program Information from UMD CS, AMSC (Applied Math, Scientific Computing), as well as a panel of Grad Students sharing their experiences. I learned some useful information for my application -- including that CS seems to match students to advisors during the application process whereas AMSC is much more lax about selecting an advisor due to the breadth of options available. In this sense, I learned that for my CS applications, I will need to be much more tailored to the area I want to study, whereas for AMSC (which I am pretty interested in), I can speak more broadly about my background and why I might be a good fit.

Somewhere along the line, the Panera lunch came in, with everyone running over to secure their food. I was already sitting closer to the back, so I managed to snag a box lunch without pushing or shoving, but I think the lunch process could have been a bit orderely -- I'm not a big fan of the people who push and shove to get their top lunch choice, especially when there are so many people and, as I'd pointed out, likely not enough lunches. I felt particularly bad for the Salisbury students, who were sitting in the front due to their presentations; many of them did not end up getting a box lunch and instead went to IRB or Panda Express to get some food.

- 2:30 - 4:00 PM: With the REU activities and grad panel, today was a much shorter research day than anticipated. When we came back from the talks, I got to work trying to test my code on a better GPU -- I definitely got more images generated than normal, which was great. One of the main things we'll need to consider is how to get better edit weights -- currently, with the approach I'm using, a set of male dominated images will become female dominated after editing; however, I'm trying to get it much closer to a 50-50 split. I suppose that I could just select a few of the images to edit based on the overall distribution, but this doesn't seem very elegant as a fix, though I guess that could be said about the SEGA approach as a whole.

After research, I went straight to Today's Hair to get a haircut -- which was quite needed. Heading back to the dorms, I talked with DS a bit inside before deciding to head out on another run (2 mile one just like in the morning) to get some more exercise in on a nice day. I ended up coming back, only for ML and AB to be in the shower cue, so I promptly went out to the dining hall with LH for dinner. We ended up having a good conversation, which reminded me how nice it is to be talking with other REU students :) I came back and showered, and then we met up with AB, SS, DS, and XG to watch the movie "No Hard Feelings." I got some CodeForces done along the way (with an extra hour of debugging needed after the movie) and unfortunately also ended up losing my keys (which is not good -- I got a spare for now but will need to find them. I do think they're somewhere in the suite though which should limit potential spots) before calling it a night. I think I'll definitely need to work extra hard this week to get the presentation going and to prepare a good summary of the work we've done -- tomorrow will be a big day on this front.

### <u>Day 58 (August 1st) </u>

Week 9 Day 2

- 8:30 - 9:00 AM: I woke up pretty tired and so I snoozed the alarm for another thirty minutes. After waking up at 8:30, my stomach didn't feel too great so I decided to skip my morning workout. Excuses are excuses at this point, but if there's any solace in the fact that I skipped, I did run twice yesterday, so technically my evening run yesterday can replace my intended morning run today. My keys did end up turning up, however, which was the highlight of my morning -- it turns out DS took mine, mistaking it for his, and he ended up with two keys in his room last night. Minor complications aside, it's good to have them back as the room replacement key prices are expensive (I would have to pay only if I had not found them).

- 10:00 AM - 12:00 PM: My group found out that our advisor is actually back in the States and will be available for an in-person meeting on Thursday. Unfortunately, that timing coincides with a number of events, including AF heading out-of-state from Thursday to Saturday. We have planned a Thursday meeting from 4 - 5 with our advisor in which we'll Zoom AF in. In terms of research, I talked a bit about my group about the presentation and our research approaches. After some discussion, I felt that my group wasn't really too worried about the presentation -- not sure to take this as a positive or a negative -- but I really want to make sure we summarize and present our work well. I did end up agreeing, however, that the Beamer presentation that I ended up starting might not be the best idea given Beamer's positioning troubles and the fact that we don't have anything math-y we need to present, so I decided to switch to Google Slides. I do like the professionalism of Beamer templates so I think I'll end up recreating the Beamer template in Slides, but Slides will definitely be easier to use. I worked a bit more on my Semantic Guidance approach, including setting up a general pipeline that varies the seeds (which is similar to the Fair Diffusion approach) during generation -- we'll use this when we generate lots of images.

- 1:15 - 4:00 PM: In the afternoon session, I started a bit of the presentation (mainly setting up the Beamer presentation in Google Slides) and experimented more with SEGA. SS has been a bit discouraged about her erasing concepts approach so I pushed all my code to the GitHub and took some time to explain the approach/experimentation I've done thus far to her. I think with the code I have so far, we have "solved"/can solve batch gender fairness (more fair gender representation in a batch of images), but for some reason, when I include races as guidance categories, the image output changes drastically (the background no longer stays the same which is exactly what SEGA should be doing). I tried experimenting a bit with why this was the case, but SS is now working on seeing if we can solve group batch gender fairness. I think there is good progress being made here but I wish that I had not lost a few days of work to the stomachache -- if we had another week or two I think we would have much more solid presentation results, but alas, that's just the way the cookie crumbles sometimes.

After research, I joined DS, SS, and PM, who made plans to go to the gym. After some deciding/arguing about what activities we were going to do, we just decided to head out and not worry about it. When we got to the weight room, the badminton courts were also empty, so we decided to do weights and badminton. For some reason, PM was quite interested in how much I could bench (I have not done weight training in my life), and so after some convincing, I managed to work myself up to a failed bench of 125 pounds (XG and PM were giving me tips and spotting me) before successfully completing 125 and 135 pound benches, which I was very much surpised (and happy) about. After a failed attempt on 140, I decided to stop the weights there and went out to play badminton with DS -- SS and PM joined shortly after. Badminton was also pretty fun -- I was quite bad at first (and quite expressive on the court), but I got better after hitting around and it ended up being a good time. We went to the dining hall (I first met up with LH since I offered to pay for her -- she has much less on her card than me) and DS, SS, XG, and PM joined us after. 

In the rest of the evening, I did some laundry (this was a bit annoying since both dryers and washers were full both times I went -- I felt bad about taking out other people's clothes but I luckily noticed that one of the piles was DS's, so I called him to take out his laundry which freed up a slot for me), coding, and worked a bit on the presentation before calling it a night. These have certainly been an eventful last few days but I think it's important to spend as much group time as I can with everyone before the REU ends. 

As a side note, my girlfriend Sherry is finally moving into her apartment for her full-time work starting soon, which is awesome! I'm very proud and hope that she settles in well (hi if you're reading this!) -- she is actually planning to visit sometime soon so that will be fun as well. 

### <u>Day 59 (August 2nd) </u>

Week 9 Day 3

- 8:30 - 9:00 AM: Got out for some morning exercise this morning with a 2 mile run. It's good to get back into the groove of things exercise-wise, especially because I think it sets me up well for the work day.

- 10:00 AM - 12:00 PM: In the morning, I mostly worked alone. My group didn't end up arriving until later, but I focused on building on the presentation slides I worked on yesterday and testing the SEGA approach more. As I found previously, the SEGA is working pretty well (even compared to the Fair Diffusion approach) when I am using gender guidance, but not as well when I am attempting to guide both the race and the gender, since the image output seems to get completely changed. After a few failed attempts of tinkering with the weights more and seeing if that would change anything, I finally figured out why this is the case -- in one of my lines of code, I was setting the pipeline of the generated image to a different random seed than the other generated images -- this is the main cause in the complete change of the output of the image!

- 12:00 - 2:00 PM: The UMD Math REU had their final poster presentations today, and REU-CAAR was invited to come listen. Overall, I thought the posters were quite well done. Considering their program is only 8 weeks long, I felt that their overall work was quite impressive. I listened to a majority of the poster presenters, including ones about Cluster Algebras and Polylogarithm Relations, the SIR Model, and a few Applied Math/Machine Learning topics revolving around dimensionality reduction of molecular interactions.

- 2:00 - 4:00 PM: After the Math REU talks, I went back to IRB and met up with the rest of my group. We each discussed presentation plans (AF finished her slides and XG says he'll work on them tomorrow before our meeting with our advisor), our research progress, and what we anticipate discussing with our advisor tomorrow. In terms of my SEGA approach, after I noticed the seed problem, the results are better but still don't work as nicely as I would like -- the guided images have pretty much everyone as the same race, which is not what we are looking for in terms of fair representation. I do think that we have good progress to show on this front and am excited to hear what my advisor thinks/has to say tomorrow.

I stayed a bit longer after research to listen to the Parallel Algorithms Group (PM, MA, AB) run through their presentation. Afterwards, I grabbed some CFA and scarfed it down for dinner before heading out with XG, SS, DS, and LH to Karoake in DC. We met up with the other group (PM driving SK, ZS, MA, AZ, and AB) and had a really good time at the Karoake place. I do think that certain people were pushing a bit hard on the songs they wanted to sing without thinking much about what others wanted, and certain people definitely enjoyed the Karoake more than others, but it was overall a fun time. After the drive back, I relaxed, did some coding, and prepared a bit for our meeting tomorrow. Big day tomorrow -- and it will be a long one too. After research we'll jump into our meeting (4-5) and then there is an REU Board Game night, which should be a good way to decompress after the meeting.


### <u>Day 60 (August 3rd) </u>

Week 9 Day 4: Meeting #6

- 8:30 - 9:00 AM: No morning exercise today -- I woke up pretty tired and my stomach hurt a bit so I just got a bit of extra sleep. Today was geared up to be a big day -- Sherry is coming to visit for a few days, starting today, and we also have a meeting with our advisor after research.

- 10:00 AM - 12:00 PM: In the morning, I once again worked alone for a bit. AF is out for the next few days, SS came in a bit late, and XG came in even later. I can't really control anyone else's effort besides myself but I feel a bit bummed since I want to have a good final push in the REU, especially with the presentation and important meetings coming up. I talked to XG a bit about his RL approach -- it's a bit of a work in progress but he's done some good conceptual work to support it thus far -- before working more on the presentation for our meeting and generating more pictures for individual and group fairness of both firefighters and teachers.

- 12:00 - 1:00 PM: Sherry took a Lyft from her apartment to College Park -- after some searching, I found her near STAMP, we dropped off her stuff in my room, and then went out for lunch. It was really great to see her again and I'm happy she'll be staying for the next few days. We met up with a large portion of the REU back in IRB, where I introduced her to the other students, and ate our lunch.

- 1:00 - 4:00 PM: There are a lot of group presentations happening right now -- Bill told the groups to bring a "friend" to the practice talks (where Clyde Kruskal is going to provide feedback on our presentations) so they can give advice about how to make it better. DS explained the Comp Geo presentation to me yesterday night, so I didn't want to double dip and listen in when I could be working. XG and SS decided to tag along (which is totally fine, especially since they haven't seen the presentation before), and this meant that I was working alone again for much of the afternoon. I invited Sherry and LH to our normal room and I did a few practice run throughs of my presentation before working further on group fairness. I didn't end up seeing SS or XG until near 4, when we went over to our advisor's office for our meeting.

- 4:00 - 5:30 PM: The meeting with our advisor went fine. She had a lot of feedback about our approaches and the general presentation (we presented a draft of our final presentation, which we'll also be presenting in front of Clyde next Monday when AF is back), especially since it has been a while since our last official meeting (we sent updates but she was out for the ICML conference so I imagine she wasn't able to read/understand much). We each presented what we were working on -- I got a number of comments/questions about the Semantic Guidance approach, which she seemed to be on board with. After SS, XG, and AF (who was Zooming in) explained their respective approaches, we talked about next steps. My advisor thought the modified images were quite good and that Semantic Guidance is quite powerful (adjusting just the guided concepts), and wanted to understand the Semantic Guidance process and the math behind it more. This makes a lot of sense -- in the next few days, I will also look into more of the math behind semantic guidance while improving the final presentation. Another idea she wanted me to think about is combining SS's concept erasure approach with [another approach](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2304.03916.pdf) she saw at ICML -- instead of freezing the entire diffusion model for concept erasure, we can freeze all but a few layers and fine tune those layers to lead to better guidance. This may be a more elegant approach than Semantic Guidance, considering Semantic Guidance moreso is a postprocessing step that modifies the output rather than the diffusion model itself. She also mentioned to keep in constant contact with her throughout this last week, and I think it will be good to finish strong and perhaps build on the project in the fall if all goes well.

After the meeting, I joined up with a large contingent of the REU for another Board Game night. The catering option was Medditeranean today, and I quickly ate that before moving on to play DiXit with Sherry, PM, MA, SS, LH, and a grad student. We moved on to a few hectic but fun games of Mafia before calling it a night. It was definitely a super long day but really fun overall, and it was especially highlighted by the fact that I got/get to see/be around Sherry again after not seeing her for the last few months! Hoping that tomorrow is a productive and fun Friday, which will wrap up the 9th (wow!) week of the program.


### <u>Day 61 (August 4th) </u>

Week 9 Day 5: End of Week 9

- 8:30 - 9:00 AM: Felt quite tired this morning so slept in to get some extra rest. I did wake up to a flurry of texts -- it turns out a good third of the REU went out to the DC Waterfront area and messed around until 3 AM. This made me feel great about my decision to not go out yesterday night -- I was already feeling pretty tired despite sleeping around midnight.

- 10:00 AM - 12:00 PM: XG and SS messaged me that they were going to work from home yesterday early in the morning (they ended up going to DC), so it was just me and Sherry in IRB in the morning. As I wrote about yesterday, I read over the Semantic Guidance paper more closely, paying attention to the mathematical reasoning and the general framework. After the first read through, I didn't get much more intuition behind the math, so I switched over to working a bit on the presentation slides to close out the morning.

- 12:00 - 1:30 PM: Sherry and I walked over to IRB where we met up with more of the REU -- I haven't been feeling too hungry lately and managed to eat only half my pizza. After lunch, we went to the bookstore to look around and contemplate what to spend my extra meal money on (we ended up getting a small notebook  for herand a pencil case for me).

- 1:30 - 4:00 PM: XG didn't show up for lunch and it seemed like SS was going to join a larger group to play Jackbox, so I decided to work from home in the afternoon after dropping off the leftover pizza in the fridge. I continued to read through the SEGA paper again -- it seems like they use noise estimates to provide the semantic control/guidance -- but the math is quite heavy and not terribly motivated. I'm hoping to get a solid grasp by Monday and to meet with my advisor then to discuss.

I felt quite tired in the afternoon so I took a nap, before working on some CodeForces and then heading out with Sherry for a run. We did a nice 2 mile loop around campus and walked the remainder of the distance to Pho Thom to enjoy a nice dinner. We grabbed some Kung Fu Tea on the way back before chilling out for the night. I think I'll try to play some tennis with Sherry tomorrow and maybe have some meals with the others. 

### <u>Day 55 (July 29th)</u>

Week 9 Day 6: The End is Near

After another average night of sleep (I woke up a few times, including at around 3 AM when it sounded like people were coming back/brushing their teeth to head to sleep, along with a few times in the morning), I woke up around 9 AM and got ready to head out to play some tennis with Sherry. As has been the case the last few weeks, there are typically at least two rackets to borrow from the gym, but today I was only able to get one racket, which meant that the tennis we were expecting probably wouldn't happen. When we got to the courts, we found a large group with six rackets, and two or three of them were just not being used. We asked to borrow them and they agreed, so we got to hit around until the group left and we were once again left with just one racket. Luckily, we were saved by another group of players who had a few extra rackets and agreed to lend us one. The racket itself looked pretty professional so I made sure to not do any crazy hits/try to scrape the racket. Overall, the tennis itself was pretty fun and it was great to hit around with Sherry!

For lunch, we decided to head over to Aroy Thai, which was recommended to us by LH. Sherry has said that eating with the large group is a lot, since they are quite loud, so we decided to invite just LH to lunch with us. It was good to catch up with her (and hear about the larger REU group's adventures over the last few days) while enjoying some yummy Thai food. 

In the afternoon, I took a look at problems from this morning's CodeForces contest. A and B were relatively simple and I got them pretty quickly (I would have placed between 3000th and 5000th with just my performance on the first two  problemsin practice, which would be a strong performance relative to my rating), but C looked harder and I want to spend some time working on it later. Sherry and I attempted to check out the bookstore to see what merch we could get with my (still) extra money, but the bookstore closed before we could really find anything. 

We went out for an evening run afterwards -- this time to make sure Sherry secured the Course Record on the McKeldin Loop segment (I ended up crushing a 6:45 mile after pacing her for the first 800), and then walked over to Playa Bowls to enjoy a light dinner. We came back, relaxed and finished the rest of our leftover pizza, before calling it a night. It was definitely a fun time today -- she is leaving tomorrow which will be sad but I'm glad and proud that she's getting ready for the start of her new job on Monday!